Liquid Helium Cryostat 

Rule #1: Never allow the temperature to rise above 70 K while the sample space valve is closed. Nitrogen will boil off and blow out the inner window (a minimum 4 hour down time).  If at any point it approaches 70 K, leave vacuum on with the sample valve open, further open the needle valve temporarily to increase cooling.
 
Rule #2: Dont pull vacuum on the sample space while the sample rod has been removed. This will draw room temperature air into the 15 K sample space, icing it up.

---
Normal Operation:

The cryostat should operate at 15 Kelvin.

A vacuum pump sucks helium from the dewar. A needle valve controls the flow from dewar to pump, thereby controlling the temperature of the cryostat.

The normal operating position of the needle valve (to achieve 15 K) is to close the needle valve all the way (clockwise), then open it about a quarter turn until the sharpie mark on the knob is pointed to noon.

---
Changing the sample: 

Removing the sample rod from the cryostat exposes the 15 K sample space to room temperature air. Therefore, it is necessary to run a helium purge gas through the sample space to maintain positive pressure prior to removing the rod. 

Also, inserting a room temperature rod into the cryostat will cause the temperature to sharply rise, quickly passing the 70 K limit. Therefore, the sample rod (with the new sample holder affixed) must be pre-cooled in liquid Nitrogen.

At the control panel, turn on the helium gas flow.  At the cryostat, verify you feel the purge gas coming from the pressure relief valve (PRV). If you cannot feel it, verify the purge gas supply gas bottle has not run empty. Once the purge gas is running, open the sample space valve.

Next, stage the new sample rod in liquid nitrogen next to the cryostat. Also have the short blank rod nearby if needed for emergency (does not require precooling).

In one motion: remove the new sample rod from the liquid nitrogen; invert it; lightly shake off any residual liquid.  Remove the sample rod from the cryostat, quickly count the samples to ensure nothing has broken off or fallen in. If there is no issue, insert the new rod. If anything looks wrong, insert the blank rod and regroup - do not insert a full length rod. 

Immediately after inserting a new rod, pull vacuum on the sample space. Watch the pressure gauge at the control panel. Once it reaches full vacuum, switch to flowing helium purge gas. Cycle purge gas to vacuum back and forth 3 times. Keep an eye on the temperature, it should recover back to 15 K without needing to adjust the LHe needle valve.

---
Stuck Rod: 

If even a small amount of air gets into the cryostat, it can form a layer of ice that causes the sample rod to get stuck.  This often happens as the rod is partially being removed, or it can happen when fully inserted. 
First, If the rod gets stuck, do not force it.  If possible, insert the rod back into the cryostat fully. Again, dont force it.

How to recover: The cryostat needs to be warmed to 85 Kelvin to ensure all nitrogen has been boiled off.

Situation 1: Rod is stuck part way - The plan is to get the rod back in all the way. 
1. Make sure the sample space valve is open
2. Since the cryogenic sample space is still being exposed to room temperature air in this state, flow helium purge gas (make sure the sample space valve is open) to reduce further ice build up. 
3. Warm the cryostat. Fully close the LHe needle valve (clockwise) to stop cooling the cryostat. Turn on the cryostat heater (instructions below).
4. Once the temperature has increased above 75 K, gently try to reinsert the sample rod. By 85 K all ice should be removed, so further trouble might be due to a broken sample holder obstruction.
5. Once the rod has been re-inserted take on the steps of Situation 2: Rod is stuck fully in.

Situation 2: Rod is stuck while all the way in the cryostat
1. Make sure the sample space valve is open
2. Pull vacuum on the sample space to remove nitrogen as it is boiled off.
3. Warm the cryostat. Fully close the LHe needle valve (clockwise) to stop cooling the cryostat. Turn on the cryostat heater (instructions below).
4. The cryostat must reach 85 K to ensure all nitrogen has boiled off.
5. Once 85 K is reached, cycle vacuum and helium purge gas a few times.  End with helium in the sample space. Close the sample space valve.
6. Cool back down
6a. Turn off the heater
6b. Open the needle valve until the sharpie mark points to noon.
7. Swap the sample rod as usual

---
How to turn on the cryostat heater:
1. On the temperature controller, under the heater section, set the mode to Auto
2. Hold down set, then hold "Raise" until the setpoint displays 85 K
You should see the heater bars indicate full power

---
How to turn off the cryostat heater:
1. Hold down set, then hold "Lower" until the setpoint is back to 0 K

---
Blown window:

If the Hastings gauge (measures pressure in the vacuum jacket) rises dramatically when helium gas flows to the sample space, there is a leak in the sample space window. The cryostat needs to be rebuilt.  Pull vacuum on the sample space with the sample space valve open. Contact staff.

---
Liquid Helium Dewar: 

Our dewars hold 100 liters. The cryostat uses 15 L per day under normal operation.  Depending on the type of dewar, in some cases we cannot use the last 10 L of the dewar. Therefore a dewar should last about 6 days.

When the dewar begins to run out, the baseline temperature will begin to creep up.  This happens over a few hours.  If this is observed, contact staff to exchange the dewar.  If the temperature passes 60 K, open the sample space valve and pull vacuum.
